227-0159-00L  Semiconductor Devices: Quantum Transport at the Nanoscale
Semester	Spring Semester 2026
Lecturers	M. Luisier, J. Cao, A. Emboras
Periodicity	yearly recurring course
Language of instruction	English


images/arrow-page-first-blue.png  Tabs

Courses
Number	Title	Hours		Lecturers
227-0159-00 V	Semiconductor Devices: Quantum Transport at the Nanoscale	2 hrs	
Thu	08:15-10:00	ETZ E 7 »
M. Luisier, J. Cao, A. Emboras
227-0159-00 U	Semiconductor Devices: Quantum Transport at the Nanoscale	2 hrs	
Thu	10:15-12:00	ETZ E 7 »
M. Luisier, J. Cao, A. Emboras

Catalogue data
Abstract	This class offers an introduction into quantum transport theory, a rigorous approach to electron transport at the nanoscale. It covers different topics such as bandstructure, Wave Function and Non-equilibrium Green's Function formalisms, and electron interactions with their environment. Matlab exercises accompany the lectures where students learn how to develop their own transport simulator.
Learning objective	The continuous scaling of electronic devices has given rise to structures whose dimensions do not exceed a few atomic layers. At this size, electrons do not behave as particle any more, but as propagating waves and the classical representation of electron transport as the sum of drift-diffusion processes fails. The purpose of this class is to explore and understand the displacement of electrons through nanoscale device structures based on state-of-the-art quantum transport methods and to get familiar with the underlying equations by developing his own nanoelectronic device simulator.
Content	The following topics will be addressed:
- Introduction to quantum transport modeling
- Bandstructure representation and effective mass approximation
- Open vs closed boundary conditions to the Schrödinger equation
- Comparison of the Wave Function and Non-equilibrium Green's Function formalisms as solution to the Schrödinger equation
- Self-consistent Schödinger-Poisson simulations
- Quantum transport simulations of resonant tunneling diodes and quantum well nano-transistors
- Top-of-the-barrier simulation approach to nano-transistor
- Electron interactions with their environment (phonon, roughness, impurity,...)
- Multi-band transport models
Lecture notes	Lecture slides are distributed every week and can be found at
https://iis-students.ee.ethz.ch/lectures/quantum-transport-in-nanoscale-devices/
Literature	Recommended textbook: "Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems", Supriyo Datta, Cambridge Studies in Semiconductor Physics and Microelectronic Engineering, 1997
Prerequisites / Notice	Basic knowledge of semiconductor device physics and quantum mechanics
CompetenciesCompetencies	
Subject-specific Competencies	Concepts and Theories	assessed
Method-specific Competencies	Analytical Competencies	assessed
Problem-solving	assessed
Personal Competencies	Creative Thinking	assessed
Critical Thinking	assessed
Self-awareness and Self-reflection	assessed

Performance assessment
Performance assessment information (valid until the course unit is held again)
 Performance assessment as a semester course
ECTS credits	6 credits
Examiners	M. Luisier
Type	session examination
Language of examination	English
Repetition	The performance assessment is offered every session. Repetition possible without re-enrolling for the course unit.
Mode of examination	oral 30 minutes
Additional information on mode of examination	Eine Bonus-Uebung wird angeboten. Die Schlussnote der Studierenden, die sie erfolgreich geloest haben, wird um 0.25 Punkte erhoeht. Auf Wunsch des Kandidaten kann die Prüfung auch auf Deutsch abgelegt werden.
This information can be updated until the beginning of the semester; information on the examination timetable is binding.
